Fred Ryan:
Good afternoon.
I'm Fred Ryan, Chairman of
the Board of the White House
Historical Association.
The Association is honored to
be part of today's historic
ceremony and to have played
a role in arranging for the
magnificent portraits that
are about to be unveiled.
The White House Historical
Association was founded
50 years ago by First Lady
Jacqueline Kennedy with two
specific missions.
The first is to educate and
inform the public about the
history of the White House
and the distinguished group
of Americans that
have inhabited it.
In this regard, it is an
exciting time for us as we mark
our 50th anniversary campaign
for White House history.
To the north of the White House
at the historic Decatur House we
have just launched the new David
Rubenstein National Center for
White House History.
Next year, to the south
of the White House,
we will open a newly redesigned
White House visitors center.
It will give the millions of
visitors to Washington each
year a chance to gain a broader
understanding of life in the
White House.
If we can just acquire
something on the east and west,
we'll have the place surrounded.
(laughter)
The other mission of the
association is to provide
funds to preserve the White
House public rooms and enhance
its incomparable collection
of decorative and fine arts.
Over the five decades and ten
presidents since our founding,
the Association is proud to have
provided nearly $40 million in
financial support for
refurbishing and making
important acquisitions
for the White House.
Through the portraits of our
presidents and first ladies,
it's a wonderful tradition that
here in America's house our
country honors those
who have honored us.
The tradition began with
the acquisition of George
Washington's portrait in 1800.
It was purchased by the
United States government.
It was viewed as such an
important national treasure,
it was the object of Dolly
Madison's greatest concerns
when the British burned
the White House in 1814.
The White House Historical
Association has been privileged
to commission the official
portrait of every president
and first lady over
the last 50 years,
and to acquire historical
portraits of those who were
previously missing from
the White House collection.
In our digital world, where so
many images are mere flashes
on a screen, these enduring
portraits of great Americans by
acclaimed artists are lasting
tributes to our presidents and
first ladies and will
forever be part of the
White House collection.
Today, the portraits
of President George W.
Bush and First Lady Laura Bush
will be added to this unique
collection of those who have
occupied this house and served
our nation with distinction.
And to those great presidential
portrait artists whose works
here include Gilbert Stuart,
John Singer Sargent and Aaron
Shikler we now add
John Howard Sanden.
So today's event may once
again prompt one of those
great debates that's taken place
often within the White House.
Strong arguments will
be made on both sides.
It's not a debate over
issues or between parties.
It's a debate as to whether the
portrait actually looks like the
President and First Lady.
(laughter)
And we will soon find that out.
It is now my distinct pleasure
to introduce the President of
the United States.
(applause)
President Obama:
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
(applause)
Thank you.
Please, everybody, have a seat.
Well, good afternoon, everybody.
Thank you, Fred, for
that introduction.
To President George
H.W. Bush and Barbara,
to all the members of the
Bush family who are here --
it is a great privilege
to have you here today.
And to President and Mrs. Bush,
welcome back to the house that
you called home for eight years.
The White House is
many things at once.
It's a working office,
it's a living museum,
it's an enduring symbol
of our democracy.
But at the end of the day, when
the visitors go home and the
lights go down, a few of us are
blessed with the tremendous
honor to actually live here.
I think it's fair to say that
every President is acutely aware
that we are just temporary
residents -- we're renters here.
We're charged with the upkeep
until our lease runs out.
But we also leave a piece
of ourselves in this place.
And today, with the unveiling
of the portraits next to me,
President and Mrs. Bush will
take their place alongside men
and women who built this
country and those who worked
to perfect it.
It's been said that no one can
ever truly understand what it's
like being President until they
sit behind that desk and feel
the weight and responsibility
for the first time.
And that is true.
After three and a half years
in office -- and much more
gray hair --
(laughter)
-- I have a deeper understanding
of the challenges faced by the
Presidents who came before
me, including my immediate
predecessor, President Bush.
In this job, no decision that
reaches your desk is easy.
No choice you make
is without costs.
No matter how hard you try,
you're not going to make
everybody happy.
I think that's something
President Bush and I both
learned pretty quickly.
(laughter)
And that's why,
from time to time,
those of us who have had the
privilege to hold this office
find ourselves turning to the
only people on Earth who know
the feeling.
We may have our
differences politically,
but the presidency transcends
those differences.
We all love this country.
We all want America to succeed.
We all believe that when it
comes to moving this country
forward, we have an
obligation to pull together.
And we all follow the humble,
heroic example of our first
President, George Washington,
who knew that a true test of
patriotism is the willingness
to freely and graciously pass
the reins of power
on to somebody else.
That's certainly been
true of President Bush.
The months before I took
the oath of office were
a chaotic time.
We knew our economy
was in trouble,
our fellow Americans
were in pain,
but we wouldn't know until
later just how breathtaking
the financial crisis had been.
And still, over those two and a
half months -- in the midst of
that crisis -- President
Bush, his Cabinet, his staff,
many of you who are here today,
went out of your ways -- George,
you went out of your way -- to
make sure that the transition to
a new administration was
as seamless as possible.
President Bush understood that
rescuing our economy was not
just a Democratic or
a Republican issue;
it was a American priority.
I'll always be
grateful for that.
The same is true for
our national security.
None of us will ever forget
where we were on that terrible
September day when our
country was attacked.
All of us will always remember
the image of President Bush
standing on that pile of
rubble, bullhorn in hand,
conveying extraordinary strength
and resolve to the American
people but also representing
the strength and resolve of
the American people.
And last year, when we delivered
justice to Osama bin Laden,
I made it clear that our success
was due to many people in many
organizations working
together over many
years -- across
two administrations.
That's why my first call once
American forces were safely out
of harm's way was
to President Bush.
Because protecting our country
is neither the work of one
person, nor the task
of one period of time,
it's an ongoing obligation
that we all share.
Finally, on a personal note,
Michelle and I are grateful
to the entire Bush family for
their guidance and their example
during our own transition.
George, I will always remember
the gathering you hosted for all
the living former Presidents
before I took office,
your kind words
of encouragement.
Plus, you also left me a
really good TV sports package.
(laughter)
I use it.
Laura, you reminded us that
the most rewarding thing about
living in this house isn't
the title or the power,
but the chance to shine a
spotlight on the issues that
matter most.
And the fact that you and
George raised two smart,
beautiful daughters -- first,
as girls visiting their
grandparents and then as
teenagers preparing to head out
into the world -- that obviously
gives Michelle and I tremendous
hope as we try to do the right
thing by our own daughters in
this slightly odd atmosphere
that we've created.
Jenna and Barbara, we will never
forget the advice you gave Sasha
and Malia as they began
their lives in Washington.
They told them to surround
themselves with loyal friends,
never stop doing what
they love; to slide down
the banisters occasionally --
(laughter)
-- to play Sardines on the lawn;
to meet new people and try new
things; and to try to absorb
everything and enjoy all of it.
And I can tell you that
Malia and Sasha took that
advice to heart.
It really meant a lot to them.
One of the greatest strengths of
our democracy is our ability to
peacefully, and routinely, go
through transitions of power.
It speaks to the fact that
we've always had leaders who
believe in America, and
everything it stands for,
above all else -- leaders and
their families who are willing
to devote their lives to
the country that they love.
This is what we'll think about
every time we pass these
portraits -- just as millions
of other visitors will do in
the decades, and perhaps
even the centuries to come.
I want to thank
John Howard Sanden,
the artist behind
these beautiful works,
for his efforts.
And on behalf of
the American people,
I want to thank most sincerely
President and Mrs. Bush for
their extraordinary
service to our country.
And now I'd like to invite
them on stage to take part
in the presentation.
(applause)
(portraits are unveiled)
President Bush:
Thank you, sit down.
Sit down.
Behave yourselves.
(laughter)
Mr. President, thank you
for your warm hospitality.
Madam First Lady, thank
you so much for inviting
our rowdy friends --
(laughter)
-- to my hanging.
Laura and I are
honored to be here.
Mr. Vice President,
thank you for coming.
We are overwhelmed
by your hospitality.
And thank you for
feeding the Bush family,
all 14 members of
us who are here.
(laughter)
I want to thank our
girls for coming.
I thank Mom and Dad,
brother, sister, in-laws,
aunts and uncles.
I appreciate you
taking your time.
I know you're as excited as
Laura and me to be able to
come back here, and particularly
thank the people who helped make
this house a home for
us for eight years,
the White House staff.
I want to thank Fred Ryan and
the White House Historical
Association and Bill Allman,
the White House curator.
I am pleased that my portrait
brings an interesting symmetry
to the White House collection.
It now starts and
ends with a George W.
(laughter and applause)
When the British
burned the White House,
as Fred mentioned, in 1814,
Dolley Madison famously saved
this portrait of
the first George W.
(laughter)
Now, Michelle, if anything
happens there's your man.
(laughter and applause)
I am also pleased,
Mr. President,
that when you are wandering
these halls as you wrestle with
tough decisions, you will now be
able to gaze at this portrait
and ask, what would George do?
(laughter)
I am honored to be hanging near
a man who gave me the greatest
gift possible, unconditional
love -- and that would be
number 41.
(applause)
I want to thank John Howard
Sanden for agreeing to use
his considerable talents
to paint my likeness.
You've done a fine job
with a challenging subject.
(laughter)
In the portrait, there's
a painting by W.H.D. Koerner
called, "A Charge to Keep."
It hung in the Oval Office for
eight years of my presidency.
I asked John to include it,
because it reminds me of the
wonderful people with whom
I was privileged to serve.
Whether they served in the
Cabinet or on the presidential
staff, these men and women --
many of whom are here -- worked
hard and served with honor.
We had a charge to keep
and we kept the charge.
It is my privilege to introduce
the greatest First Lady ever --
sorry, Mom.
(laughter)
Would you agree to a tie?
A woman who brought such
grace and dignity and love
in this house.
(applause)
Mrs. Bush:
Thank you all.
(applause)
Thank you, everybody.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, darling.
Thank you, President
and Mrs. Obama.
Thank you for your kindness
and your consideration today.
It was really gracious of you
to invite us back to the White
House to hang a few
family pictures.
(laughter)
And I'm sure you know nothing
makes a house a home like having
portraits of its former
occupants staring down
at you from the walls.
(laughter)
This is not the first time I've
had the opportunity to confront
an artistic likeness of myself.
A few years ago, just
after the 2008 election,
a friend sent me something he'd
found in the gift shop of the
National Constitutional
Center in Philadelphia.
It was a Laura Bush
bobblehead doll.
(laughter)
He said he found it on
the clearance shelf.
(laughter)
But I'm flattered and grateful
to know that this particular
work has a permanent home.
And thanks to the masterful
talent of John Howard Sanden,
I like it a whole lot better
than I do that bobblehead doll.
(laughter)
Thank you very much, John Howard
Sanden -- you're terrific to
work with.
And thanks to Elizabeth
and your family who have
joined you today.
Thank you very, very much, John.
(applause)
And, of course, it's meaningful
to me as a private person to
know that these portraits will
be on view at the White House,
that my portrait will hang
just down the hall from my
mother-in-law, and that George's
portrait will hang very close to
his dad's.
But what's more meaningful
is it's meaningful to me
as a citizen.
This was our family's
home for eight years.
It was our home, but
it wasn't our house.
This house belongs to the people
whose portraits will never hang
here, the ordinary and
not-so-ordinary people whose
lives inspired us and whose
expectations guided us during
the years that we lived here.
In this room are many of the
people who stood by us as we
faced the tragedy
of September 11th,
and who worked with
us in the years after.
Thanks to each and every
one of you for your service
to our country.
(applause)
I hope others will see in this
portrait what I see: a woman who
was honored and humbled to live
in the White House during a
period of great challenge,
and who will never forget
the countless American faces
who make up the true portrait
of that time.
Thank you all very much.
Thanks so much.
And thank you, Michelle,
if you want to come up.
(applause)
The First Lady:
Well, I don't think
we have enough tissue
to go around.
(laughter)
Jenna and Barbara,
they're just a mess.
(laughter)
But I want to thank
President and Mrs. Bush
for joining us today.
I'd like to take this
opportunity to thank Laura
for providing such a wonderful
model of strength and grace for
me to follow as First Lady.
It is an interesting job, and
it's just been amazing to learn
from your example not
just as a First Lady,
but as a mother of two
wonderful daughters.
You're on the other side
of where we hope to be --
(laughter)
-- in a couple of years -- two
daughters that sit up straight
and cry when they're --
(laughter)
-- and think lovingly about
their mom and their dad.
(laughter)
We're working towards that goal,
but you've done a terrific job.
And I also want to echo Barack.
We couldn't be more thankful for
the warmth and graciousness that
both of you showed -- all of you
showed -- our family when we
moved in three years ago.
It is truly, truly a privilege
for us to occupy this house.
And hopefully, we are setting
the same example of warmth and
love and hope that you
all have provided as well.
The warmth is truly
reflected in these portraits,
and I promise you --
(laughter)
-- I promise, I'm
going straight for --
(laughter)
-- and I'm sure it will be
closer right down the stairs,
and I'll get right to it.
So I am thrilled for all of
the White House visitors who
will soon have the chance
to enjoy them as well.
And I'm thrilled for both of you
as you join these incredible
Americans whose portraits are
already displayed here at the
White House.
So congratulations again.
Congratulations on the
work that you have done,
the example that you have
provided to this country,
and what it means to
be an American family.
We are so happy and proud
and honored to be a part.
And with that, it is my pleasure
to invite you all to join us for
a reception right outside
in the State Room.
Now it's time to eat.
(laughter)
Thank you all so much.
(applause)